---
layout: portfolio_entry_small
title:  "Capstan-based Force Amplifier"
description:  "Investigated use of capstans as dynamic force amplifiers and demonstrated a system utilizing an elastic cable constrained by an outer housing"
image: "/img/capstan.jpg"
datedone:  "2011 - 2012"
categories: physical
color: '#f4c97b'
---

## Motivation

I investigated the use of capstans (a cable-wrapped cylinder) as dynamic force amplifiers with a small team.  The project began with the goal of devising a distributed power system for robotic applications, specifically bipedal locomotion.  Most bipedal systems require individual strong actuators for each joint, resulting in unfortunate weight distributions and slow, awkward gaits.  

## Challenges

Our biggest challenge was in mechanical design.  Capstans are traditionally static force amplifiers, using static friction to amplify input force exponentially with wrap angle.  To use them in a dynamic setting, we had to design a system to use the less powerful dynamic friction.  But the system also could not be allowed to bind, or static friction would take over and rip the system apart.

## Solution

Our design uses a stiff elastic cable, constrained by an outer housing.  The cable's stiffness makes the system's resting state unengaged.  When the input is triggered, the cable is put under tension from one side, pulling a portion of it into contact with the capstan, amplifying the force on the output side by drawing power from the constantly spinning drum via dynamic friction.

## Results

We demonstrated that the amplified output force followed the input force pattern accurately.  This means that a small, accurate input device could control a far larger and self-regulating output force from a large, constantly running, efficient source, such as a small gas engine.  The input force corresponds to input draw distance, simplifying force control and allowing for variations in the rotational speed of the drum.

Our design also allows novel weight distributions, since the weight of the main driving engine can be distanced from the driven point.  Even more, it can result in lighter overall systems.  One strong central actuator can power many points of action, each controlled independently by a small, lightweight actuator, rather than requiring a strong actuator at each point.

We publised our results at ASME IDETC/CIE 2012.  Thank you to Professors Aaron Hoover and Zhenya Zastavker of Olin College for all their help and guidance.

[Get the paper here.](/files/Capstan_IDETC.pdf)
