---
layout: portfolio_entry_small
title:  "Medical Device Design: Evaluating Eustachian Tube Function"
description:  "Developed a device to non-invasively measure and evaluate eustachian tube function"
image: "/img/mdd.png"
datedone:  "Fall 2013 - Present"
categories: design, physical, pm
color: '#f4c97b'
permalink: /:title.html
---

## THE PROBLEM

As you've probably heard, antibiotic overprescription is a big problem.  It's even more significant in children, with repeated antibiotic cycles in the early years being linked to a variety of developmental and long-term health issues.  Otitis media, or middle ear infection, is the most common acute medical condition in children with over 16 million annual episodes in the US alone and accounts for a large portion of antibiotic prescriptions.

Eustachian tube dysfunction is the leading cause of otitis media.  The tissues of the middle ear (just behind the eardrum) act as a pump, absorbing gases and resulting in a negative pressure in the middle ear.  The eustachian tube balances this negative pressure with the outside world.  But in children, the long, thin, squishy eustachian tube does not always open effectively.  If the pressure is not balanced, fluids can be pulled from the body into the middle ear, resulting in pain and leaving good conditions for an infection to grow.

If this happens to a kid a lot, tubes can be put in their ears to act as substitute eustachian tubes until they grow.  But by that point, they've typically already had multiple antibiotic cycles.  Even worse, otitis media is often misdiagnosed due to the difficulty of getting useful information about the middle ear noninvasively.  Effective diagnostic evaluation of eustachian tube function would enable preventative care and ensure proper diagnosis, improving child happiness and massively reducing antibiotic prescription.

## THE CHALLENGE

The primary challenge was the development of an effective non-invasive measurement technique.  Evaluating eustachian tube function requires distinguishing very small differences in the pressure of the middle ear over long periods of time.  On top of that, there are plenty of noise sources, such as patient movement and speech.

## THE SOLUTION

I worked with a small team in collaboration with an ENT specialist from Boston Children's Hospital.  We developed a proof-of-concept device to measure the pressure in the middle ear indirectly via the outer ear pressure.  Even as a prototype, the device is highly effective, validating the measurement technique.

As a bonus, the device lends itself to a friendly headphones form factor and can even function as headphones, music and all, during testing.  The device is currently patent pending and further development is ongoing.